This is an honest piece of writing which I had shared in my 50th newsletter.I tried to summarize what my experiences between 2020 to 2025 have taught me in 50 short notes. 
These 5 years of my life involve ; 2 years in lockdown, failing my IIT exams, overcoming a porn addiction, starting college at BITS Hyderabad and moving out of home, 
trying to startup, internships, people and friendships, writing, reading, and working out. 

# Daily Life & Habits

1. Most of your life is the things you do every day: sleeping, eating, commuting, talking with people, working, studying, and things you do daily. Once you are able to spot these daily things, aim to do them as well as possible. All improvement starts at a very atomic level, the little things.

2. Practice what you want to become. My education in biological sciences has taught me about neurological circuits that are built because of our actions. Every repetition of a habit is like hammering nails in the 2 ends of this circuit, cementing them densely within us. These habits become our safe space. Pay attention to your daily actions. What you do every day is more important than what you do once in a while. I am also referring to habits like silent critiquing of the world, lying, faking niceness, and not doing what you promised to do. It eventually becomes a part of you, and then the whole of you.

3. I do this when I feel like shit. Clean your room, do laundry, hit the gym, take a shower, read a bit, write a bit. In the same order. It helps me restore a sense of calmness and focus on what is more important and get out of any rut.

# Addiction & Breaking Toxic Habits
4. Addiction starts when you find comfort in escaping the sadness of your mundane existence and the pressure of challenging ambitions you might have. Addiction becomes a survival mechanism, a shield from facing the reality. And it's very difficult to get away with it once it is registered as a survival mechanism.

5. Porn consumption is not about morality. It's more of a health and lifestyle issue. It numbs you from feeling the beauty of life. It elevates your dopamine baseline so high that you find most things around you boring and meaningless. It inhibits you from forming deep and meaningful relationships. It also brings an air of negative energy that is invisible but intuitively felt around you.

6. The rewards of struggling to get rid of an addiction are high. When you try to quit an addiction, you will find yourself with multiple reasons to relapse because you are fighting against a learned survival mechanism. You need to learn better methods of self-care and survival. Escaping may feel like survival, but every attempt to escape reality is like a hammer blow to your soul. With each blow, it depletes.

7. Don't beat yourself up for getting addicted. Everyone is vulnerable to a continuous loop of pleasure, especially when it repeatedly protects you from the pain you are trying to get rid of. But what the addiction does not tell you is that it can never eliminate the pain; it can only pile it up on the side. It saves the backlogs for later. One day the pile shall fall over you, and the weight of this burden and regret will crush you.

8. Do everything you can to get rid of the addiction. Study addiction, study yourself, seek help, go to online communities, talk to professionals, and talk to a friend, but you need to take responsibility for getting help. When you find the courage to try to quit, you will find yourself. There is a deeper spiritual message that I fail to convey here. But if you overcome a toxic negative loop of yours due to intentional efforts, you will understand what I am saying.

An unsaid perk of being a regular gym person is you build camaraderie and brotherhood within that place. I have made some of my best friendships because we worked out at the same time. This place also humbles you down when you fly high, and keeps you stable on bad days.

# Ambition and Aiming High
9. If you have the privilege to choose, try to be in a place where people are smarter, faster, healthier, and kinder. Your society’s influence over you is much larger than you think. So be around people who are better than you. You want your survival skills to be tested. In an attempt to keep up with the smarter bunch of folks, you will inevitably improve yourself.

10. Start with what is closest within your reach. I started by joining college clubs, departments, student bodies on campus and gave my 100%. Over time, I gained some confidence and access to push myself to try to start up. When that failed, I landed 2 internships. But I know that the start was at college clubs and departments. Because that is where I met my co-founders, and after that startup only was I able to get those internships. You can never connect the dots forward, but you must start taking tiny actions to create dots.

11. There are two ways to learn from people: (1) ask them how they do it. They will tell you, probably sell you a playbook, or try to explain to you in an organized manner. There is another option, a better one. (2) Observe them. Just spend time with them. Become a fly on their wall and watch how they move. You end up learning more.

12. Read as much as you can. The act of reading is burdensome because it is lonely. So I can understand why it is difficult for someone to read, especially when the modern culture is optimized for instant gratification and shallow content. Reading is an act of psychological intimacy between you and the author's thoughts. This intimacy is difficult for some people.

13. A lot can happen if you give yourself the permission to be a beginner, to be bad and terrible, to make mistakes, to embarrass yourself, and to be looked at as cringe and dumb. And this needs you to not take yourself seriously. I mean, we are just monkeys, aren't we?

# Navigating Life
Recently I went on a rampage, hammering my keyboards and writing without breaking into paragrpaphs. I was at it for over one hour, and these 5 points have been taken from that long paragraph.

14. We all seek playbooks and formulas to get out of problems, but the ambiguity in real life is so high and intense that you can't condense every problem into frameworks. You can learn from history and your past patterns to make better decisions, but you can't escape the ambiguity. Let’s take placements for example. You don't want to be at the mercy of a placement cell or a crash course to launch your career. Unfortunately, we have been trained and wired to rely on some authority to take care of us. We have delegated the responsibility of our career to a bunch of people responsible for placements in college. That only leaves you anxious and helpless. I am not against the idea of college helping you in getting a job, but I am against the idea of hoping your college will come like a knight in shining armor and save you, who is a pretty damsel in distress.

15. Not all days are exciting. Some days you just get through with the bare minimum. A single is also a good shot. Good balls are meant to be left. Read the pitch. Protect your stumps. Sometimes you have to take a hit on the body; if that is what is to be done to survive, then so be it. You get better as you spend more time on the pitch.

16. Once you leave home, you never come back to the same home. You and home never change at the same rate; hence, there will always be a difference. In a hostel, you will have to become home for the people around you because everyone has left home. You rebuild from scratch with new people.

17. Here is the thing about growing up that very few people talk about. You take up responsibility, you decide to pursue a degree or a career, you buy a gym membership, you join a club in college, you pick an internship, you decide to start up, and you do all of these things hoping that you will respect the person you lock eyes with in the mirror. But the house you choose to buy is also the house you have to repair. Glory is not in taking responsibilities but fixing the gaps that continue to pop up over time.

18. We dream of the future with a utopian narrative. But life is full of detours; it will go off path, and there will be a moment you realize that you don't exercise complete control over the steering. But never ever let go of the steering anyway. In the stress and force you produce over the wheel, in the sweat that drips out of uncertainty, in your trials and errors shifting the gears, in these efforts that are not planned but intuitive, you will find yourself.

# Friendships & Interpersonal Stuff
Every point written here is associated to some incident or with some friend in mind.

19. Friendships are a habit. If you understand this immediately, you might have struggled a lot to maintain friendships. If you don't, maybe you have had it easy so far. I belonged to the latter. But 3 years have reminded me that human relationships are not to be taken for granted, and you must take active efforts in maintaining them.

20. People want to be heard and feel safe in expressing their opinions. A safe space and attention are the greatest gifts you could give a person.

21. A friendship is as strong as the amount of discomfort you can tolerate in conversations and silence. And in most cases there is actually no discomfort in silences or honest conversations.

22. There is also a high chance (almost a guarantee) that some friendships will break or fade over time. Never regret the love and care you gave someone. They needed it, even if they don't admit it. More importantly, there was a sense of meaning and joy you derived by giving it. You needed it, and you may not admit it.

23. Show up when a friend is performing. Even if you have other commitments, find a way to make time. Not showing up may not dent the friendship, but if you can cheer for a friend on his/her special day, it’s beautiful.

24. Be careful of small talk. They are the greatest killer of friendships. Not talking for a month is so much better than frequent small talks.

25. Take more photos and videos. Record randomly. Because the beauty of a friendship is because of the randomness, and it is beautifully reflected in randomly clicked photos and videos.

26. Meet their parents, interrupt them when they are on a video call with family, and introduce yourself. Tell your parents about your friends. If possible, call them home for lunch.

27. There is a cliché that communication solves all interpersonal problems, and I have not come across a case where this stood false. But I have come across instances where people (myself included) failed to understand communication itself. You can talk all you want, write about it, read about it, and also let the other person talk all they want. But until both people truly hear each other, your messages are like dead fish going with the flow.

28. The first step is always to be a good friend. You are not entitled by default. Good people won't be flocking around you unless you are one. Over time you will realize that not all are great friends. Some of these realizations might be hard to swallow. But life moves on; there are better people and opportunities in store. The best you can do is to be a good friend yourself and do more of what you love.

29. People need to be told when they are a jerk. That is also the greatest help you can do for them. When it comes to people, trust your intuition.

# Mental Health / Student’s Anonymous

Student’s Anonymous is a student body at BITS Hyderabad. We are like a layer before professional help, and students approach us to talk about things they find it hard to talk to a friend. My time here has allowed me the privilege to listen to people while they pour out. I have heard traumas from childhood, loneliness at college, uncertainity about future, breakups, dealing with grief due to losing a close one, exam stress, addictions, and lot more. Most of the points below are inspired from incidents and episodes with Student’s Anonymous.

30. Everyone is carrying some sadness. Waste no time in comparing who has it harder because that serves no benefit to anyone. You would never know about the sexual assault she/he had to face. You would never know that his mother is fighting cancer. You would never know the difficulty she has in trusting people because her father abused her. The world is full of people who have gone through terrible things, and the likelihood of you getting to know about someone’s past is less. The burden someone is carrying on their shoulder is invisible to the naked eye. So kindness by default is the least you can do to make someone's life a bit easier.

31. When you realize that someone is getting vulnerable, don't interrupt them. It is probably the first time, or one of the very few occasions, they get to let their thoughts flow. This is not just an act of humanity but also productivity. When someone is allowed a safe space to verbalize what they are going through, they are more likely to find a solution to this problem themselves.

32. Many think that they are terrible people. Most people mask their shame through arrogance, humor, or some other behavior that they are always associated with. And in vulnerability, they take this mask out. So that they can breathe. When they do so, let them breathe as much as they can.

33. We are a hopeful species. We hope we get the job, we hope we like our job, we hope we marry someone we love, and we hope it all works out well. And because of the detours life may take us on, because of high expectations, or just conditioning throughout life, some people run out of hope. If you get a chance to charge someone with realistic hope or can make them believe that the sun shall rise only after the darkest hour of dawn and all you have to do is hang in there, I think you can take quiet pride in yourself.

There has been no greater joy than being a part of Student’s Anonymous. I believe that it is one of the most meaningful use of my time over the last 5 years. The team has members from 4th, 3rd, 2nd and 1st year of college.

# Some More Things on Growing Up
34. The passage of time makes me slightly nervous, because it means that the hands that kept us warm and safe during childhood will soon start to tremble and shake out of old age. And when this silently converts from a fear of the future to reality, it will be the source of a lot of sadness. A lot of today’s good is going to fade away.

35. There is another thing that is much less discussed about growing up. The silence after you just realize that you are no more a child. The silence after you put your heart and soul into something and it does not go as planned. The silence after your parents have dropped you in your hostel and you are alone, with 1000 other kids who are also alone. The silence after the things you feared actually happen. Don't disrespect this silence by escaping it, because if you don't hear what it has to say, it will come back and keep coming back till you hear it out.

36. You are constantly going to find yourself smaller in status and achievement when you look at the world around you. The feeling of "Oh boy, I wish I had started earlier" will eat up your peace. You may feel that you have achieved nothing. Despite failed attempts to outgrow yourself, if you are still trying, it is not nothing. Take your time to cross the road.

37. The price of anything is the amount of life you exchange for it. Delay gratification, but don't deny gratification. Life's duties will never be out of your way. There will be pending work even when you die.

38. Over time, you may become increasingly self-centered, consumed by your ambitions and dreams. In this state, you start judging others by how ambitious they seem, wasting precious time that is already limited. You might seek shortcuts to bolster your ego, often by silently critiquing and judging your peers or those more successful than you. Don't worry, though. This insecurity masked as arrogance doesn't go unnoticed by life. It will humble you down.

39. Pay attention, fight hard to stay away from distractions, observe the mundane and boring things as they are, and think for yourself what they are. There is a silent war we are all fighting against distraction. Not the cliche distraction problems that do not allow you to study. I mean the distraction that does not let you pay attention to what your friend is saying, when your mother is angry, or when your dad is laughing hysterically. It’s a problem because in order to survive, you must be aware. If you are distracted, you become a victim to change. That’s terrible.

40. A writer must not go around saying he is one. He must write. Like a musician should play music. Like a chef must cook. It's very ironical to go around saying what you do when you can just do what you do. Then you will no longer have to say what you do. Because your work will speak.

# Starting Up, Internships, and this Newsletter
These are lessons I learnt while trying to startup (W&H), my internships at Spectrum, HTCI and Zenskar, and the last 16 months of writing this newsletter.

41. The perks of trying to start up in college have been clear to me. W&H taught me a lot, although we failed to build anything useful. You learn better and faster by doing things yourself, learning from people better than you, and not shying away from saying/doing something stupid. Your worst-case scenario after trying is you learn a lot. That’s a great worst-case scenario. It makes it the safest thing to do. Because you improve even if you fail.

42. When working with people, it helps to be shameless in saying, ‘I don’t know; can you teach me or guide me on how to learn?’. And in many cases, you are better off saying you know it, even when you don’t. I told the HR that I knew SEO optimization during the interview, and I learned it during the internship.

43. I have felt some default friction to do any work. But if the problem you are solving is something you find exciting or meaningful, then all working and operations feel smoother. You would ideally want to feel a quiet pride in the work you do.

44. A good email can unlock great opportunities. I don’t know about HRs, but I feel that founders of startups like students who work on independent projects. My newsletter has always been a topic of discussion in my interviews.

45. Treat everything like a project or an experiment. Do them with a lot of passion. Being called ‘obsessed’ is a compliment in a world where most people half-ass their work. Run many experiments in parallel. Then you will find 1 or 2 things that seem to work. And the failed experiences always come back to you in ways you did not envision while starting out. No passion, however brief, gets wasted. A metric to decide if a project is worth doing or not is that if it puts you on a steep learning curve or not. If it does, take a shot at it.

46. If you don’t know something, ask ChatGPT to explain it to you. Use it to clarify doubts and gaps in understanding. Watch YouTube videos and read a few blogs on it. The cost of learning is attention. Pay attention.

# Notes To My Future Self
I had written myself an email and scheduled it for my 20th birthday. I actually forgot about it, and it was pleasing to read it.
I will let the content of this letter remain private. But there are a few things I can share based on this.

47. If you think deeply, for long un-interrupted periods of time, you will find a few non-negotiables for yourself. To me that has been reading, writing, physical health, long quiet walks, conversations that allow you and other to share personal things. I find it difficult to function well in the absence of these.

48. There are great wins - Centuries, double centuries, diving catches, player of the match, trophies etc. Then there are small wins - good practice sessions, healthy diet for a long time, an extra push on tired days, recovery. The great wins come, but you must bring the small wins everyday. A single is a also a good shot.

49. Don't fall prey to all advice. Think for yourself.
I think the 49th advice is the most important one. But again, think for yourself. These are things I have found to be true. It maybe different for you.

50. On bad days, go for a walk. On good days, go for a walk. Everyday, go for a walk. And know that in the end it eventually works out fine.

I hope this was useful. I will maybe write another one in a few years. First 50 is easy, but 50 news lessons will require me to pay more attention to life happening to me. 
You can read the newsletter version of it here ; https://rishikeshvar.substack.com/p/50-fifty-lessons-since-march-2020

